https://www.facebook.com/scientistsafrica/posts/2005258026389217

I WANT TO LEARN COMPUTER PROGRAMMING, WHICH LANGUAGE CAN I LEARN FIRST

Most times people ask which programming language they should learn first when entering the field of computer programming. This is an easy but difficult question. The most truthful answer is that, a person can learn any of the available languages, although it also takes a number of considerations to get to the most correct answer. The first thing is to know how fast the learner is, how much they are good at Math, and also how lazy/impatient the learner is and what is the intention of learning programming in the first place.

For anyone who wants to get into computer programming, I would say, experiment with a few languages, then see which one you like most. Learn that one first then learn others as you build more understanding and confidence in the field. For those who want to learn computer programming inorder to tackle a particular task, I suggest that you use a language that will allow you to solve your problem. There is no need to learn C# when you eventually want to be making websites, or learning Java if you want to be making low-level system applications.

Most people find it easy to start with Python language, which is good. Back in the day, BASIC language was the entry point. When I teach, i like to teach the basics of a few languages to my students, C#, Java, C/C++ and Python, then from there, I like to see which language each student prefers. I use the language the student prefers as a foundation for other languages. If a student shows unique mathematical abilities, i consider Python or R language. From experience, I have noticed that many people have a quick adaptation for Python than other languages, a few however develop a bond with C# and Java, the least few with C/C++.

I would like to discourage lazy people from getting involved with C/C++ or lower level languages. If you know you are lazy, Python is easy to work with. Python comes with so many libraries and more can be imported or downloaded, which makes it easier to work with. It takes more effort and sacrifice to learn languages like C/C++, Java and C#

Mathematically gifted people should consider R, F# and Fortran as part of their study, although I recommend Python for a start. *Please note that F# is not a variant of Fortran language.

I find javascript particularly interesting as well. I recommend it for people who want to get into website development.

The most important thing to do is to learn languages that you can apply either at work or in your projects. It is not necessary to learn a langauge that you cant use for anything. It is better to learn 1 language and use that knowledge to change the world, than to learn ALL languages but still be unable to change even the channel on your TV. I encourage you to apply your knowledge and studies to something meaningful. It is not enough to know every thing, apply that knowledge somewhere!!!

For enthustiasts, I cant recommend anything because you must be up to something already.... like they say, you can't order a goat to eat the hyena. 

For any comments, corrections, additions or subtractions, please put your comments

Please like and share this post, and also like our page

God Bless You
Happy Coding
